>> Biohacking.
It's not just about
being well, it's
about being more than well.
It's the power to
transform yourself.
Are we ready?
I'm Dave Asprey, and
this is Biohacking.
Hi.
I'm Dave Asprey.
People call me the
father of biohacking.
Part of that's because I
did all the things that
were supposed to work to help
me lose 100 pounds to learn
how to be happy.
I became famous.
Didn't make me happy.
I became wealthy.
Lost all the money.
Didn't make me any
more or less happy.
And along the way, I
went to Nepal and Tibet
and I studied with various
gurus around the planet.
I did daily breathwork
advanced practices, for more
than five years, advanced yoga.
And I studied Native
American practices
and South American practices,
traditional Chinese practices.
What I found was that
spirituality is intrinsically
linked with being human.
Whether or not you
have a religion
or you don't, there's a
spiritual side to being human.
And it's also tied to longevity.
In fact, many of the
famous spiritual practices
out there like Taoism
or TCM or Ayurveda
were very focused on
extending human lifespan.
So there is no biohacking
without acknowledging
spirituality.
What you find is that
when you deliberately
build a body and a
mind that is resilient,
that has more energy than
it ever did before, that has
more than enough
energy to just survive,
you will naturally
and inexorably
be pulled into a
spiritual direction.
Because when there's
enough energy for that,
that's what the
body's designed to do.
What this episode is about
is about teaching you
how to create automatic
kindness and forgiveness,
because those are states
that are beneficial for you
biologically and
neurologically and emotionally
and spiritually.
But it's hard to do that.
Many different practices around
the world will lead you there.
In fact, many of the
practices you'll find on Gaia
help to create these states.
But as a biohacker, I'm
interested in getting there.
But I'm also interested
in getting there
in the fastest possible time,
with the least possible effort.
Because if I can save
that time and that effort
and I can apply that
somewhere else, whether it's
in service to other people, to
my family, or just doing stuff
that brings me joy,
why would I do anything
in a way that's harder
than is necessary
in order to get those results?
And around my
spiritual practice,
I believe the same thing.
As you build
physical resilience,
as your body becomes
better able to sense
the environment around you,
your spiritual resilience
grows as well.
In the model that
I use, you have
mitochondria, billions of them
embedded inside your cells.
In fact, there's
way more of them
than there are
cells in your body.
Mitochondria serve as antennas
for the world around you.
They're environmental sensors.
They're tiny little
computers that
try to make sense of reality.
Then they are a collective
consciousness inside your body
that decides whether
to make energy,
whether to make stress
hormones or sex hormones,
or to fold proteins
or to make melatonin.
It can manufacture anything.
Whether just to make a ton
of electricity for you.
And then it filters out
a bunch of information
and sends the rest of
it up into neurons,
which eventually
makes it to your brain
a third of a second later.
So your mitochondria are your
frontline spiritual sensors.
If you can use
spiritual practice
to program your
mitochondrial networks
to find the reality
that you want,
they will help you do that.
But if you leave them
up to their own devices,
they will find things
that are fearful.
They will find lack.
They will find anger.
They will find hate because
they think it makes you safer.
So it's your job to
program your mitochondria
to behave themselves in order
to create the world that you
want to live in.
And yes, there is science
showing that mitochondria
and other parts of
your nervous system
are filtering out reality so
that you can just see enough.
Imagine if you had a life size
map of the state of California.
You just unroll it and
then you could use it,
except it would be useless.
So what do we do?
We have a tiny map that's
maybe on your phone that
represents the state
but it's not the state.
Bad news for you.
Everything that you see and
feel and sense right now
is actually a map of reality
because your brain and my brain
are nowhere near big enough
to pick up all of reality.
We just can't process
that much information.
So our bodies, as we're
born, as we evolve,
they filter out
almost everything
so that we can pay attention
to a tiny little drop.
You can control the filter.
And that's what spiritual
practice does for you.
I didn't come by this
knowledge intentionally.
I came by this knowledge
because I grew up
in a science minded family.
Both of my grandparents were
PhD level nuclear engineers
and chemists.
And I grew up without a
religious or spiritual
practice.
In fact, I grew up
believing that anyone
who believed in a spiritual
practice was provably an idiot.
It was only after I
tried all the things that
were supposed to work, and
I was profoundly unhappy.
I was anxious.
And I did all the things that
were supposed to bring you joy.
And it just didn't work.
What I discovered when
I started going deep
in personal development
and spiritual practice
about 20 years
ago is that trauma
is the primary programmer
of your mitochondria
and of your nervous system.
It affects long-term operations
of that nervous system.
It affects the balance between
sympathetic and parasympathetic
systems.
Trauma gets stored
in your body, I
believe in those mitochondrial
networks, in your fascia.
And unprocessed emotion
that you've held on to gets
stored there, and it affects
your lens on reality.
And this is why emotional
healing is part of biohacking,
because if you can be triggered
by anything on the planet,
it means you're walking
around with a loaded gun.
You think about that.
That's what triggered means.
When you do your
spiritual work, when
you do your biohacking
work, you unload the gun.
So you cannot be triggered.
Well, what unloads your bullets?
It's forgiveness so what
I'm going to do here
is I'm going to teach you how
to turn off these bad pattern
matches where your mitochondria
are looking around.
They're trying to keep you safe.
And they're triggering you
to feel an anxiety response
from something.
And what it is, it's just
an inappropriate connection
between something
happening around you
and an emotional response
that's not serving you anymore.
So a spiritual practice
allows you to go in and edit
your operating system settings.
These are non-ordinary
states of consciousness.
And they can look very
different for each of us.
You can have entities
you work with.
You can have non-entities
You can have all sorts
of pictures or views
of the reality.
But at the end of the
day, what you can do
is you can go in and sense
different parts of the world
by using a variety of
spiritual practices.
I know beyond a
reasonable doubt because I
have worked with world
class gurus you've heard of.
And when I help them
with biohacking,
their spiritual practice,
their meditation practice,
their ability to
perceive things radically
improves, because
their mitochondria
that drive that improve.
So biohacking gives you
stronger mitochondria,
which gives you better antennas
for the spiritual reality
that we're all
bathed in every day.
So do the foundational
hacks that you'll
find in the other
episodes of this series.
Learn how to eat so
you have clarity.
Make sure you get your
broad spectrum minerals,
your vitamin D.A.K.E.
Learn how to exercise
in ways that give you
more energy instead
of sapping your energy.
And magically, your
clarity goes up.
And along the way as
you become more powerful
or just as things
happen in your world,
it's not uncommon for
people to have what's
called a spiritual crisis.
It's different than
an emotional crisis,
but sometimes it happens
at the same time.
Maybe you lost your
house in a flood,
which has happened to me.
Maybe you went
through a bad breakup
or you fell in love with a
narcissist or a narcissist
destroyed a company
that you worked at
and suddenly you have to
do something different.
All of these things
can cause you
to question your
reality, which is
different than an
emotional crisis.
If you have this kind
of spiritual stress
where you really feel like
the world is not right,
you can operate from a
place of disorientation,
from weakness, from confusion.
And what you want
to be able to do
is learn how to handle
spiritual stress.
And there are
techniques to do that.
If you think spiritual
stress sounds
sort of like an airy fairy
conceptual concept, no.
People who are experiencing
this have physical and emotional
responses.
You get mad at people.
You get rashes, pains,
fatigue, a lot of brain fog.
So here's what
you do about this.
The first step is to
learn automatic kindness
and forgiveness.
And your body will automatically
default to behaviors that
are meant to keep you safe.
And this basically
makes you mean.
And it makes you selfish.
One of the problems that we
have in the world right now
is empathy.
What, Dave?
Did you just say that
empathy is a problem?
No.
Empathy is the first step on
building a spiritual practice,
because the ability to feel
another person's emotions,
whether they're
positive or negative,
that's very, very
important for you.
And if you can't
feel that, you're
not going to be a
very nice person.
But once you feel empathy, if
you feel everyone's pain all
the time, you will be
disabled by your empathy.
And this is a major
problem today.
So what you do when you
create automatic kindness,
and I'm about to tell
you how to do that,
is you learn to
wish well for others
without having to
take on their pain.
And that is called compassion.
And compassion is a
higher spiritual state
than just empathy.
So they're both good.
But compassion is a lot better.
So you can see
someone suffering.
You can decide to help them
if it's within your means.
But if it's not
yours to handle, you
don't have to suffer for the
rest of the day on behalf
of someone else.
Now I've just
mentioned forgiveness.
A lot of us, including
me, have been
through substantial traumas.
Forgiveness is a specific
neurological, spiritual state
that I've taught 1,500
entrepreneurs and actors
and pro-athletes how to do using
neurofeedback and neuroscience.
Forgiveness is not saying that
something that happened to you
is OK.
It is not saying that something
bad that happened was OK
or telling the person who did
it to you that you forgive them.
Forgiveness is about you
turning off an automatic fear
and anxiety response
to something.
It means letting go of a
grudge so that it no longer can
trigger you.
So you can be non-reactive.
When you forgive, which is part
of the reset process that's
in my books and in
my content online
at my neuroscience company,
it's a structured process.
And it permanently removes
automated unkindness.
And you can see this in
people's brainwave patterns.
Think about it like this you're
driving in traffic and someone
cuts you off.
Now the normal
response that I've
had for the first
half of my life
involved having very built up
muscles around my middle finger
because I probably would
have flipped the person off,
I would have got mad.
And my body would have
automatically created
a story that this
person cut me off
because they think they're
more important than me
and it doesn't matter
and how unjust it is
and all sorts of whatever.
Now that's not a
very healthy response
because it didn't make me happy.
It made me unhappy.
And it didn't change the fact
the person was in front of me.
So an equally valid
story is that the person
is on the way to the hospital
for the birth of their child
or to see their mom
before she passes away.
It doesn't matter.
What's going on here is I get
to choose my state because I'm
no longer triggered by someone
cutting me off because I
changed the story around it.
And the way you activate
this forgiveness and the way
you do what I call a spiritual
reset is you actually seek out
a triggering memory.
What's the first time you felt
the way that you feel when you
get triggered by
something, something
you just really have
a hard time handling.
And if you just sit with
that and you feel into it,
you're going to see a
picture in your head.
Something's going to appear.
It's usually something
from childhood
that doesn't make
any sense sometimes.
And as you do that, you'll say,
Oh, that is the first time.
I forgot about
that all the time.
So I'm like, Oh, that's weird.
My nervous system as a
40 something year old
is still running
programming from first grade
that I had forgotten all about.
None of this is conscious.
This is all in your
operating system.
And a spiritual practice
around forgiveness
allows you to go in
and find those states.
And you actually re-experience
the pain as best you can.
What I want you to be able
to do is then literally sit
the person across from you.
You visualize them across from
you with your eyes closed.
And you see it from
their perspective.
And you ask yourself, what
did that person's parents
do to them?
What had to happen
to that person
to make them do whatever
it was they did?
Like how bad is their life?
Can you see it from
their point of view?
And the reality is
that if you look
at it from their point
of view, they probably
didn't even what they
were doing or maybe they
knew what they
were doing but they
did that because their
operating system was programmed
by all kinds of abuse and
other things like that.
So what you realize is that
it wasn't about you at all.
And you can actually
forgive the other person
once you see it from
their perspective.
But the trick is
you felt the pain,
you allowed yourself,
Oh, God that really hurt.
You've seen it from
their point of view.
And then you
actually do your best
to generate a sense of
feeling of forgiveness
that actually comes from your
heart to the other person.
And when you're feeling
that acceptance,
you want to turn on the most
blissful state you can imagine.
And this is a state where you
feel your heart physically
open, your eyes are
closed, your attention
is on your third
eye, which puts you
into a specific brain state
that makes it easier to forgive.
And you sit there and
then you bring a feeling
in the hairs on your body,
in your thighs, in your hips,
in your heart, in your neck,
in your arms, your whole body.
A feeling of glowing.
A feeling of happiness.
A feeling of gratitude.
And when your body
feels the painful state
and the blissful
state, it realizes
that it was making a mistake.
And it brings the two together.
But here's the magic.
During this process, you
have to find something
that you're grateful for.
And I have worked through this
with people who are actually
tortured when they come to
my neuroscience clinic in war
situations.
I've worked with
combat veterans.
I've worked with people
who had incredible losses
in their lives.
And the hardest thing is to sit
there and say you just talked
about all the bad
stuff that happened.
Name one good thing
that came out of that.
It doesn't have
to be a big thing.
It can be I'm thankful
I still have my legs.
That's it.
One good thing, because the way
your operating system is set up
is you cannot forgive anyone or
anything until you experience
gratitude.
Gratitude is the thing that
allows you to do forgiveness.
So you sit there, you feel the
pain, you look for gratitude.
You look at it from the
other person's point of view.
And then you consciously turn
on the best feeling you've ever
had, the feeling of bliss.
And the bliss will
cancel that out.
I like to do this with
neurofeedback because I can
guide you into those states.
But what you're learning here
is a shortcut to something
that would be called
loving kindness meditation.
And it's something that
allows you to selectively go
through and edit out the things
that are your biggest triggers,
so that someone
can say something
to you that would normally make
you just clench up and maybe
yell at them and act
like a crazy person
and you regret it later.
You can turn all that off.
So the next time they do it,
you can just look at them
and just look at them.
And there's not a
negative feeling.
There's not a positive feeling.
There's just no charge at all.
I've spent six months of
my life with electrodes
glued to my head learning
how to do this practice
and doing it over and over
on every single trigger
I can find in my life.
And if you meet me and you
can find a way to trigger me,
I will thank you from
the bottom of my heart.
The reason for that
is that I will go in
and I will do this reset
process that I just taught you
and then it won't
bother me anymore.
So you can live
your life that way,
where every time
something happens,
you have automatic kindness.
You wish well for
others no matter
what they do to you because
you can teach your mitochondria
to do that.
Before your mitochondria
has a chance
to automatically think negative
things and look for threats
and look for bad things.
If you look for threats and
bad things, you will find them.
If you look for good
things, you will find them.
But you don't get
to do the looking.
You get to configure the
system that does the looking.
And that's why you
practice gratitude.
That's why you
practice forgiveness.
This works whether you
have a religious practice,
whether you have a
spiritual practice
from any lineage on the planet.
You can practice forgiveness.
I have done this with
advanced monks, with gurus,
and I've done it with
football players.
It doesn't matter.
This forgiveness state
is part of being human.
And it's the way you
program your networks
to do what you want them to do.
Now that you understand
this process,
I want you to understand
there are spiritual hacks.
You don't have to do a spiritual
practice all by yourself.
In fact, it's much harder
to do it by yourself.
One of the things that has
worked for thousands of years
is you find a guru.
In fact, there's lots
of them here on Gaia.
And latching yourself to a
single guru has some benefits.
It also has some risks because,
well, gurus tend to die.
And if you can't
get into a state
without your guru,
when your guru dies,
you're going to have
a spiritual crisis.
And you don't want to do that.
So learn from a guru.
But I believe that
there's benefits
to learning from multiple
practices at the same time.
And just please practice
gratitude and forgiveness
no matter who you're
studying with.
It will help you
in your practice.
And there are some things
that will very rapidly put you
in advanced non-ordinary
states of consciousness.
And one of the ones
that's very powerful
is holotropic breathing.
I did this first 20 years ago
with Stan Grof, the guy who
invented holotropic breathing.
And I've hosted breathwork
sessions for my community
with him.
Holotropic breathing
is something
that Stan and his wife
invented many years
ago because Stan used
legally LSD in his practice
in Czechoslovakia.
When LSD became
illegal, he found a way
to enter the same states using
a yogic breathing technique.
And he's taught hundreds
of thousands of people
how to do it.
He's considered to be the father
of transpersonal psychology.
So that's one way
to access this.
It's going to take
you about four hours.
You do it with a
partner or a therapist
or a group of people as best and
special breathing techniques.
And you can access very, very
altered spiritual states.
Doesn't take a lifetime.
It takes four hours.
You can also learn how to
practice really, really
good spiritual sex as
a spiritual practice.
Things like Taoism,
things like tantric sex,
or even things
conscious BDSM are ways
to access the somatic body.
The feelings in the
body, because when
you go into the
body, that's when you
can go into a spiritual state.
Working with a partner
to go into your body
is a way to do that,
that is very, very
valuable for some people.
There's another
technique or technology
called EMDR, eye
movement desensitization
and reprocessing.
Just remember EMDR.
EMDR is a spiritual
reset mode where
you go in with a therapist,
they have move your eyes back
and forth in a very
specific pattern,
and then all of a
sudden, whatever
you're working on, whatever that
trigger was it'll just pop up.
And when you're in
this unusual state,
you can just let it go
similar to the gratitude
and forgiveness process
I just taught you.
And when you do
that, sometimes it
just takes one or two
sessions to get over something
that you're really stuck on.
And sometimes it takes a year to
clear out a lot of your trauma.
You can also, as a
spiritual hack a way
to get there more quickly, you
can use psychedelic therapy.
And these have
biological and there are
very definite spiritual risks.
So if you're going
to use psychedelics,
do them with an exceptionally
experienced shaman or therapist
who's licensed for that.
And start with the light ones.
You don't have to go do
ayahuasca right away.
And the reason for
that is that if you
don't have the right people
holding space for you,
I believe that some
of these things
have a downside that's
greater than the upside.
So just be careful.
Don't rely on psychedelics.
If you have to do
ayahuasca 100 plus times
and you talk about it
incessantly on your podcast,
you probably didn't
get the message
that it didn't work
after the fifth time.
These are things that
open a doorway for you
so that you can do the work.
But if you rely on
psychedelics to do the work,
they are not a
spiritual technology.
They're actually a spiritual
bypassing technology.
This is rampant in
the world today.
So they're an important tool.
Be careful.
Follow properly trained
people, not podcasters.
And finally, one of the most
impactful spiritual hacks
that I've come across
in my life, the reason I
started a company that does
this is EEG or neurofeedback.
You can see the patterns
of trauma and PTSD
in someone's brainwaves,
even if they don't tell you
they have trauma.
And what I do then is I train
the brain out of that pattern.
And the combination of
simultaneously doing EEG,
so you can see what
your brain's doing
and a personal
development practice
allows you to examine everything
in your life, including trauma.
And it lets you choose
the state you're in
based on what the EEG is doing.
So it's not about just hooking
your brain up and trying
something, it's about
hooking your brain up
while I teach you
the reset process
that we talked about earlier.
And then you can see
how your brain changes.
And you can correlate, oh,
when my body feels like this,
my brain is doing that.
Now I know how to do it.
That now I know how to do
it could have taken you
10 years of daily meditation
practice to master.
That's why this is such an
amazing spiritual technology
if you have the right
personal development
process and the right
neurofeedback equipment.
You can edit the
invisible patterns
that you use to
interact with the world.
And I mentioned gratitude.
Gratitude is a part
of doing forgiveness.
But gratitude itself is
a way to turn off fear.
Now I'm going to tell
you a little story.
When I did my first personal
development event many,
many years ago, I was
feeling really uncomfortable.
And I didn't know why.
And the very, very
wise woman who
was running this event
she said, well, you're
not feeling your feelings.
And I said, I'm
feeling my feelings.
I'm angry.
This is really stupid.
I don't know why I signed up
for this dumb event anyway.
Yes, I said that.
I was a jerk.
And she looked at me
and she said, well,
do you feel anything
in your body?
And I said Yes.
I feel something in my stomach.
And she said, there's
a name for that.
And I said, what is it?
And she said, it's fear.
And I looked her right in
the eyes and I said Barbara,
there's no reason
for me to be afraid,
therefore I'm not afraid.
And she laughed and she
said, fear is an emotion,
it doesn't have to be rational.
And those are really
important words for you,
because if you think you're
a rational being, it's wrong.
You are an emotional
and a rational being
at the same time.
And your body has the ability
to change what you see
and to change the emotional
tune of what you see
and then you act rationally
based on bad information
from your operating system.
But if you turn on gratitude,
it takes your body out
of fight or flight mode,
out of find problems
in the world mode.
And it turns off fear even if
you don't think you have fear.
Fear can be hidden.
So a practice of
gratitude makes your life
feel like it takes less work.
So in the morning, you can
write down three things
you're grateful for.
And that will prime your brain
to look for more good things
throughout the day.
At night, you can write
down three good things
that happened to you that day.
And you'll go to
sleep without fear.
You'll go to bed more easily.
You can do a gratitude walk.
You go for a walk and just pay
close attention to everything
you see and you can be
grateful for the flower.
You can be grateful
for the clouds.
It doesn't even matter.
You just need to
turn on gratitude
and it's something you can
practice like a muscle.
And interestingly, U.J. Ramdas
who's a behavioral change
specialist figured out that you
need to experience gratitude
in your mind cognitively
and physiologically
for it to be effective.
In other words, you can't
think about being grateful.
You have to feel grateful
and think grateful.
And you can learn to turn on any
feeling in your body you want.
Turning on gratitude
is the most valuable
because you need it to
turn on forgiveness,
which is also valuable.
And get this, a
gratitude exercise
as part of your
spiritual practice
can boost mitochondrial
enzymes that
make you happier, more positive,
and more emotionally open.
And it takes two weeks of
gratitude practice to do that.
And with that, you
have my gratitude
for spending the last
half hour with me.
I'm Dave Asprey.
And this is Biohacking.